WIP: add new backend api documentation (#4810)
pydata/xarray: doc/internals.rst

    zgroup = zarr.open("rasm.zarr")
    print(zgroup.tree())
    dict(zgroup["Tair"].attrs)

How to add a new backend
------------------------

Adding a new backend for read support to Xarray is easy, and you don't need to integrate your code in Xarray.
All you need to do is to:

- Implement a function that returns an instance :py:class:``Dataset``

- Create a `BackendEntrypoint`` instance with your function as input.

> - Declare such instance as external plugin in your setup.py.

Reviewer: As someone who's been working on opening custom hdf formats in xarray, declaring an external plugin in setup.py doesn't seem _easy_ to me.

Why can't we simply be allowed to add functions to the engine parameter? Example:

```python
from custom_backend import engine

ds = xr.load_dataset(filename, engine=engine)
```

Author: I see our point, and I think we can also add an option to open_dataset to take in input the customed backend class.

Reviewer 2: @Illviljan - this is an interesting idea but probably deserves a more detailed discussion. Can you (or @aurghs open a separate issue to discuss)?

Reviewer: Done, see #4838.

    zgroup = zarr.open("rasm.zarr")
    print(zgroup.tree())
    dict(zgroup["Tair"].attrs)

How to add a new backend
------------------------------------

> Adding a new backend for read support to Xarray is easy, and does not require

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Adding a new backend for read support to Xarray does not require
```
(easy is relative so I'd leave this out)

> to integrate any code in Xarray; all you need to do is approaching the
> following steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to integrate any code in Xarray; all you need to do is follow these steps:
```

> - Create a class that inherits from Xarray py:class:`~xarray.backend.commonBackendEntrypoint`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Create a class that inherits from Xarray py:class:`~xarray.backends.common.BackendEntrypoint`
```

- Implement the method ``open_dataset`` that returns an instance of :py:class:`~xarray.Dataset`

> - Declare such a class as an external plugin in your setup.py.

Reviewer 4: Can we link to the entrypoints documentation here.

```suggestion
- Declare such a class as an external plugin in your ``setup.py``.
```

EDIT: I see it's linked below. Won't hurt to add a link here also.

> - Declare such a class as an external plugin in your setup.py.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Declare this class as an external plugin in your setup.py.
```

Your ``BackendEntrypoint`` sub-class is the primary interface with Xarray, and
it should implement the following attributes and functions:

- ``open_dataset`` (mandatory)
- [``open_dataset_parameters``] (optional)

> - [``guess_can_open``] (optional)

Author: done

These are detailed in the following.

open_dataset
++++++++++++

Inputs
^^^^^^

> The backend ``open_dataset`` method takes as input one argument

Reviewer 4: So these are two required arguments?

Author: Yes

(``filename``), and one keyword argument (``drop_variables``):

- ``filename``: can be a string containing a relative path or an instance of ``pathlib.Path``.
- ``drop_variables``: can be `None` or an iterable containing the variable names to be dropped when reading the data.

If it makes sense for your backend, your ``open_dataset`` method should
implement in its interface all the following boolean keyword arguments, called
**decoders** which default to ``None``:

> - ``mask_and_scale=None``

Reviewer 4: and these are optional kwargs?

Author: yes

- ``decode_times=None``
- ``decode_timedelta=None``
- ``use_cftime=None``
- ``concat_characters=None``
- ``decode_coords=None``

These keyword arguments are explicitly defined in Xarray
:py:meth:`~xarray.open_dataset` signature.  Xarray will pass them to the
backend only if the User sets a value different from ``None`` explicitly.
Your backend can also take as input a set of backend-specific keyword
arguments. All these keyword arguments can be passed to

> :py:meth:`~xarray.open_dataset` grouped either via the ``backend_kwarg``

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:py:meth:`~xarray.open_dataset` grouped either via the ``backend_kwargs``
```
i think it is "kwargs" not "kwarg"?

parameter or explicitly using the syntax ``**kwargs``.

Output
^^^^^^
The output of the backend `open_dataset` shall be an instance of

> Xarray py:class:`~xarray.Dataset` that implements the additional method ``close``,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Xarray :py:class:`~xarray.Dataset` that implements the additional method ``close``,
```

used by Xarray to ensure the related files are eventually closed.

If you don't want to support the lazy loading, then the :py:class:`~xarray.Dataset`

> shall contain ``NumPy.arrays`` and your work is almost done.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
shall contain :py:class:`numpy.ndarray` and your work is almost done.
```

open_dataset_parameters
+++++++++++++++++++++++
``open_dataset_parameters`` is the list of backend ``open_dataset`` parameters.
It is not a mandatory parameter, and if the backend does not provide it
explicitly, Xarray creates a list of them automatically by inspecting the
backend signature.

Xarray uses ``open_dataset_parameters`` only when it needs to select
the **decoders** supported by the backend.

If ``open_dataset_parameters`` is not defined, but ``**kwargs`` and ``*args`` have
been passed to the signature, Xarray raises an error.
On the other hand, if the backend provides the ``open_dataset_parameters``,

> then ``**kwargs`` and `*args`` can be used in the signature.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
then ``**kwargs`` and ``*args`` can be used in the signature.
```

However, this practice is discouraged unless there is a good reasons for using

> `**kwargs` or `*args`.

Author: > I tried to look at some of the backends that are now available, e.g. [pydap](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/blob/5735e163bea43ec9bc3c2e640fbf25a1d4a9d0c0/xarray/backends/pydap_.py) and one thing that's missing from the description here is the `DataStore`.

`DataStore` is not part of the interface. Currently, it no more needed. The old backends still have the `DataStore` but it is an internal implementation detail.

guess_can_open
++++++++++++++
``guess_can_open`` is used to identify the proper engine to open your data
file automatically in case the engine is not specified explicitly. If you are
not interested in supporting this feature, you can skip this step since

> py:class:`~xarray.backend.common.BackendEntrypoint` already provides a default

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
py:class:`~xarray.backends.common.BackendEntrypoint` already provides a default
```
I think that's `backends`

py:meth:`~xarray.backend.common BackendEntrypoint.guess_engine` that always returns ``False``.

Backend ``guess_can_open`` takes as input the ``filename_or_obj`` parameter of
Xarray :py:meth:`~xarray.open_dataset`, and returns a boolean.

How to register a backend
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Define in your setup.py (or setup.cfg) a new entrypoint with:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Define in your ``setup.py`` (or ``setup.cfg``) a new entrypoint with:
```

- group: ``xarray.backend``
- name: the name to be passed to :py:meth:`~xarray.open_dataset`  as ``engine``.
- object reference: the reference of the class that you have implemented.

> 

Reviewer 5: it would probably help to have a example here, too

Author: added

See https://packaging.python.org/specifications/entry-points/#data-model
for more information

How to support Lazy Loading
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++
If you want to make your backend effective with big datasets, then you should support

> the lazy loading.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
lazy loading.
```

Author: > Not for here but I did also not find much on what a `LazilyOuterIndexedArray` is etc...

I am still working on this part. I tried to gather some information, but couldn't find much around, unfortunately. I'm still putting the pieces together to get a better idea of how it works.

Basically, you shall replace the :py:class:`numpy.array` inside the variables with
a custom class:

.. ipython:: python

>     backend_array = YourBackendArray()

Reviewer 4: This needs to be "verbatim" otherwise sphinx tried to execute it, that's why the RTD build failed.

Reviewer 5: actually, the current failure is due to a missing newline between the rst directive and the code:
```suggestion

    backend_array = YourBackendArray()
```
once that is fixed it will indeed raise a `NameError`

Reviewer 5: it seems this exposed a bug in `blackdoc` (which is why the linting CI failed). I'll look it.

    data = indexing.LazilyOuterIndexedArray(backend_array)
    variable = Variable(..., data, ...)

> Where ``YourBackendArray``is a class that inherit from

Reviewer 4: Can we add an example ``YourBackendArray`` in the beginning that shows the signature for ``open_dataset``, the optional attributes, and the use of optional ``kwargs``? It would make this document easier to understand

:py:class:`~xarray.backends.common.BackendArray` and
:py:class:`~xarray.core.indexing.LazilyOuterIndexedArray` is a
class of Xarray that wraps an array to make basic and outer indexing lazy.

BackendArray
^^^^^^^^^^^^

CachingFileManager
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Dask chunking
+++++++++++++
The backend is not directly involved in `Dask <http://dask.pydata.org/>`__ chunking, since it is managed
internally by Xarray. However, the backend can define the preferred chunk size
inside the variable’s encoding ``var.encoding["preferred_chunks"]``.
The ``preferred_chunks`` may be useful to improve performances with lazy loading.
``preferred_chunks`` shall be a  dictionary specifying chunk size per dimension
like ``{“dim1”: 1000, “dim2”: 2000}``  or
``{“dim1”: [1000, 100], “dim2”: [2000, 2000, 2000]]}``.

The ``preferred_chunks`` is used by Xarray to define the chunk size in some
special cases:

> - If ``chunks`` along a dimension is None or not defined

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If ``chunks`` along a dimension is ``None`` or not defined
```

> - If ``chunks`` is “auto”

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If ``chunks`` is ``“auto”``
```

In the first case Xarray uses the chunks size specified in
``preferred_chunks``.
In the second case Xarray accommodates ideal chunk sizes, preserving if
possible the "preferred_chunks". The ideal chunk size is computed using

> ``dask.core.normalize function``, setting ``previus_chunks = preferred_chunks``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:py:func:`dask.core.normalize_chunks`, setting ``previus_chunks = preferred_chunks``.
```

Decoders
++++++++
The decoders implement specific operations to transform data from on-disk
representation to Xarray representation.

A classic example is the “time” variable decoding operation. In NetCDF, the
elements of the “time” variable are stored as integers, and the unit contains
an origin (for example: "seconds since 1970-1-1"). In this case, Xarray
transforms the pair integer-unit in a ``np.datetimes``.

The standard decoders implemented in Xarray are:

> - strings.CharacterArrayCoder()

Reviewer 4: the list needs some formatting.

- strings.EncodedStringCoder()
- variables.UnsignedIntegerCoder()
- variables.CFMaskCoder()
- variables.CFScaleOffsetCoder()
- times.CFTimedeltaCoder()
- times.CFDatetimeCoder()

Some of the transformations can be common to more backends, so before
implementing a new decoder, be sure Xarray does not already implement that one.

The backends can reuse Xarray’s decoders, either instantiating the decoders

> directly or using the higher-level function

Reviewer 4: Here again an example showing the use of one built-in decoder function would be useful.

Author: done

multi-thread processing.

The :py:func:`~xarray.core.indexing.explicit_indexing_adapter` method takes in
input the ``key``, the array ``shape`` and the following parameters:

- ``indexing_support``: the type of index supported by ``raw_indexing_method``
- ``raw_indexing_method``: a method that shall take in input a key in the form
  of a tuple and return an indexed :py:class:`numpy.ndarray`.

For more details see
:py:class:`~xarray.core.indexing.IndexingSupport` and :ref:`RST indexing`.

In order to support `Dask <http://dask.pydata.org/>`__ distributed and
:py:mod:`multiprocessing`, ``BackendArray`` subclass should be serializable
either with :ref:`io.pickle` or
`cloudpickle <https://github.com/cloudpipe/cloudpickle>`__.
That implies that all the reference to open files should be dropped. For
opening files, we therefore suggest to use the helper class provided by Xarray
:py:class:`~xarray.backends.CachingFileManager`.

.. _RST indexing:

Indexing Examples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**BASIC**

In the ``BASIC`` indexing support, numbers and slices are supported.
The behaviour is the same as `NumPy <https://numpy.org/>`__ .

Example:

> .. code-block:: python
> 
>     # () shall return the full array
>     >>> backend_array._raw_indexing_method(())
>     array([[0, 1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6, 7], [8, 9, 10, 11]])
> 
>     # shall support integers
>     >> backend_array._raw_indexing_method(1, 1)
>     5
> 
>     # shall support slices
>     >>> backend_array._raw_indexing_method(slice(0, 3), slice(2, 4))
>     array([[2, 3], [6, 7], [10, 11]])

Reviewer 5: while `sphinx` supports this, `blackdoc` was not written with something like this in mind (and adding this will probably take some time). Since we normally use `ipython` instead, how about converting this to verbatim `ipython`? For example, this would become:
```suggestion
.. ipython::
    :verbatim:
    
    In [1]: # () shall return the full array
       ...: backend_array._raw_indexing_method(())
    Out[1]: array([[0, 1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6, 7], [8, 9, 10, 11]])
    
    In [2]: # shall support integers
       ...: backend_array._raw_indexing_method(1, 1)
    Out[2]: 5
    
    In [3]: # shall support slices
       ...: backend_array._raw_indexing_method(slice(0, 3), slice(2, 4))
    Out[3]: array([[2, 3], [6, 7], [10, 11]])
```

Author: thank you very much for your suggestions!
However, it is not worth reviewing the new documentation now, sincee the interface for the lazy loading part will probably be changed.

Reviewer 5: sure. This is more a hint of how to get the linting CI to pass.

You can declare the entrypoint in ``setup.py`` using the following syntax:

.. code-block::

    setuptools.setup(
        entry_points={
            "xarray.backends": [
                "engine_name=your_package.your_module:your_backendentrypoint"
            ],
        },
    )

in ``setup.cfg``:

.. code-block:: cfg

    [options.entry_points]
    xarray.backends =
        engine_name = your_package.your_module:your_backendentrypoint

See https://packaging.python.org/specifications/entry-points/#data-model
for more information

.. _RST lazy_loading:

How to support Lazy Loading
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++
If you want to make your backend effective with big datasets, then you should
support lazy loading.
Basically, you shall replace the :py:class:`numpy.ndarray` inside the
variables with a custom class that supports lazy loading indexing.
See the example below:

.. code-block:: python

    backend_array = MyBackendArray()
    data = indexing.LazilyOuterIndexedArray(backend_array)
    var = xr.Variable(dims, data, attrs=attrs, encoding=encoding)

Where:

- :py:class:`~xarray.core.indexing.LazilyOuterIndexedArray` is a class

>   provided by Xarray that manages the lazy loading.

Reviewer 6: To help make things easier to understand, could we rename this class from `LazilyOuterIndexedArray` to the more generic name `LazilyIndexedArray`? (It currently works in all cases, not just outer indexing)

Author: done

- the ``__getitem__`` method that takes in input an index and returns a
  `NumPy <https://numpy.org/>`__ array
- the ``shape`` attribute
- the ``dtype`` attribute.

Xarray supports different type of
`indexing <http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/indexing.html>`__, that can be
grouped in three types of indexes
:py:class:`~xarray.core.indexing.BasicIndexer`,
:py:class:`~xarray.core.indexing.OuterIndexer` and
:py:class:`~xarray.core.indexing.VectorizedIndexer`.
This implies that the implementation of the method ``__getitem__`` can be tricky.
In oder to simplify this task, Xarray provides a helper function,
:py:func:`~xarray.core.indexing.explicit_indexing_adapter`, that transforms
all the input  ``indexer`` types (`basic`, `outer`, `vectorized`) in a tuple
which is interpreted correctly by your backend.

This is an example ``BackendArray`` subclass implementation:

.. code-block:: python

    class MyBackendArray(BackendArray):
        def __init__(
            self,
            shape,
            dtype,
            lock,
            # other backend specific keyword arguments
        ):
            self.shape = shape
            self.dtype = lock
            self.lock = dtype

>         def __getitem__(self, key):

Reviewer 6: I would suggest adding a type annotation:
```suggestion
        def __getitem__(self, key: xarray.core.indexing.ExplicitIndexer) -> np.typing.ArrayLike:
```

            return indexing.explicit_indexing_adapter(
                key,
                self.shape,
                indexing.IndexingSupport.BASIC,
                self._raw_indexing_method,
            )

>         def _raw_indexing_method(self, key):

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
        def _raw_indexing_method(self, key: tuple) -> np.typing.ArrayLike:
```

(could also note that in this case, `key` could be `Tuple[Union[int, slice], ...]` because it only implements "basic" indexing)

:py:class:`~xarray.backends.CachingFileManager`.

.. _RST indexing:

Indexing Examples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**BASIC**

In the ``BASIC`` indexing support, numbers and slices are supported.

Example:

.. ipython::
    :verbatim:

    In [1]: # () shall return the full array
       ...: backend_array._raw_indexing_method(())
    Out[1]: array([[0, 1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6, 7], [8, 9, 10, 11]])

    In [2]: # shall support integers
       ...: backend_array._raw_indexing_method(1, 1)
    Out[2]: 5

    In [3]: # shall support slices
       ...: backend_array._raw_indexing_method(slice(0, 3), slice(2, 4))
    Out[3]: array([[2, 3], [6, 7], [10, 11]])

**OUTER**

The ``OUTER`` indexing shall support number, slices and in addition it shall
support also lists of integers. The the outer indexing is equivalent to
combining multiple input list with ``itertools.product()``:

.. ipython::
    :verbatim:

    In [1]: backend_array._raw_indexing_method([0, 1], [0, 1, 2])
    Out[1]: array([[0, 1, 2], [4, 5, 6]])

    # shall support integers
    In [2]: backend_array._raw_indexing_method(1, 1)
    Out[2]: 5

**OUTER_1VECTOR**

> The ``OUTER_1VECTOR`` indexing shall supports number, slices and at least one

Reviewer 6: This should be "at most" rather than "at least"

Author: definitely! sorry for the over oversight

Author: fixed

list. The behaviour with the list shall be the same of ``OUTER`` indexing.

If you support more complex indexing as `explicit indexing` or
`numpy indexing`, you can have a look to the implemetation of Zarr backend and Scipy backend,
currently available in :py:mod:`~xarray.backends` module.

> 

Reviewer 7: It may be useful to add a discussion here on how a raw key is transformed to an `ExplicitIndexer` when querying an xarray `DataArray` with a third-party backend. This would be especially useful for picking good test cases for querying `DataArray`s and debugging problems in edge-cases.

Author: I can try to add something about it.

Author: I had a look at what to add here. I started writing some more details, but I think It would become a little bit too long. 
Today we should merge. So I suggest to merge it as it is, and I'll add later a dedicated section.

it is not possible to reuse the Xarray time decoder, and implementing a new
one is mandatory.

Decoders can be activated or deactivated using the boolean keywords of
Xarray :py:meth:`~xarray.open_dataset` signature: ``mask_and_scale``,
``decode_times``, ``decode_timedelta``, ``use_cftime``,
``concat_characters``, ``decode_coords``.
Such keywords are passed to the backend only if the User sets a value
different from ``None``.  Note that the backend does not necessarily have to
implement all the decoders, but it shall declare in its ``open_dataset``
interface only the boolean keywords related to the supported decoders.

.. _RST backend_registration:

How to register a backend
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Define a new entrypoint in your ``setup.py`` (or ``setup.cfg``) with:

- group: ``xarray.backend``
- name: the name to be passed to :py:meth:`~xarray.open_dataset`  as ``engine``
- object reference: the reference of the class that you have implemented.

You can declare the entrypoint in ``setup.py`` using the following syntax:

.. code-block::

    setuptools.setup(
        entry_points={
            "xarray.backends": [

>                 "engine_name=your_package.your_module:your_backendentrypoint"
>             ],
>         },
>     )
> 
> in ``setup.cfg``:
> 
> .. code-block:: cfg
> 
>     [options.entry_points]
>     xarray.backends =
>         engine_name = your_package.your_module:your_backendentrypoint

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
                "engine_name=your_package.your_module:YourBackendEntryClass"
            ],
        },
    )

in ``setup.cfg``:

.. code-block:: cfg

    [options.entry_points]
    xarray.backends =
        engine_name = your_package.your_module:YourBackendEntryClass
```

The above suggestion is a small naming change to emphasize the entrypoint object is a class.

Author: Thank you! You are right!

See https://packaging.python.org/specifications/entry-points/#data-model
for more information

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion

If you are using [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) for your build system, you can accomplish the same thing using "plugins". In this case you would need to add the following to your ``pyproject.toml`` file:

.. code-block:: toml

    [tool.poetry.plugins."xarray_backends"]
    "engine_name" = "your_package.your_module:YourBackendEntryClass"
    
See https://python-poetry.org/docs/pyproject/#plugins for more information of Poetry plugins.
```

Author: Is poetry widely used? I have no idea of this, so I do not know whether to add it. @alexamici what do you suggest?
